both by my friend Poirot and the family themselves, to write an account
“Poirot!” I exclaimed.
friend, Monsieur Poirot, whom I have not seen for years.”
“Oh, we know Monsieur Poirot,” said Cynthia gaily. “But I had no idea
“Yes, indeed,” said Poirot seriously. “I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. It
Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than
exploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.
“You remember my speaking of my friend Poirot? The Belgian who is here?
“No, no,” I cried eagerly, “you need have no fear of that. Poirot is
was cautiously opened, and Poirot himself looked out.
Poirot smiled kindly on me.
Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustache
“Ah!” Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailed
“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “it was only natural.”
We hurried up the village, and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirot
Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.
“Poirot,” I said, “I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know if
“This is a very dreadful business, Monsieur Poirot,” he said. “Hastings
was too much for Poirot’s feelings. He retrieved it, and buried it
“That difficulty will not exist long,” pronounced Poirot quietly.
“Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.”
“The rooms are locked?” asked Poirot.
Poirot nodded thoughtfully.
Poirot locked the door on the inside, and proceeded to a minute
any clues. Poirot, however, did not seem grateful to me for my
“_Eh voilà une table!_” cried Poirot. “Ah, my friend, one may live in a
Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger into
“Ah, this is curious,” said Poirot.
“Exactly,” said Poirot, in an odd voice. “Someone stepped on it.”
“That is interesting,” said Poirot quickly. “Yes, it is suggestive”—his
“No,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “I might have included that in the six,
“Poirot!” I cried. “This is a fragment of a will!”
“Now, my friend,” said Poirot briskly, “we will go. I should like to
We passed through Alfred Inglethorp’s room, and Poirot delayed long
“Poirot,” I cried, “where are you?”
In her attitude towards Poirot, she was inclined to be suspicious, but
Poirot looked at her keenly.
Poirot waited for her indignation to subside, and then, resuming his
I. What was all this about a lost key? Poirot smiled.
Poirot’s face did not betray a trace of whether he was disappointed or
Poirot lifted his hand.
I was becoming quite excited, but Poirot damped my ardour by remarking:
Poirot came to the point at once, with a business-like briskness.
“Think,” urged Poirot.
“It does not matter,” said Poirot, not betraying any sign of
“What makes you think there was salt in it?” asked Poirot.
marvelled at Poirot’s calm. His self-control was astonishing. I awaited
Then Poirot repeated the question he had put to Dorcas:
“Poirot,” I cried, “I congratulate you! This is a great discovery.”
“It might have been salt,” replied Poirot placidly.
first time, that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thought
Poirot was surveying me with quietly twinkling eyes.
“My dear Poirot,” I said coldly, “it is not for me to dictate to you.
“A most admirable sentiment,” remarked Poirot, rising briskly to his
A “man of method” was, in Poirot’s estimation, the highest praise that
“Where did you find this?” I asked Poirot, in lively curiosity.
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
I was about to expound these theories to Poirot, when his own words
“My dear Poirot! What on earth is the good of that, now that we know
“Oh, _là là!_ That miserable cocoa!” cried Poirot flippantly.
Poirot was sobered at once.
Poirot made me recapitulate the scene of the night before, listening
alley, but I restrained my tongue. After all, though he was old, Poirot
“You will breakfast with us, Monsieur Poirot?”
Poirot acquiesced. I observed John. Already he was almost restored to
“I think, Mr. Cavendish,” said Poirot gravely, “that you would do well
Poirot softly. “And Mrs. Cavendish?”
Poirot bent his head.
Poirot nodded sympathetically.
Poirot held up his hand with a faint smile.
“Do not worry,” said Poirot smoothly. “I assure you that you need not
“Have another cup of coffee, mademoiselle?” said Poirot solicitously.
“_Sacré!_” murmured Poirot to himself, as he brought back the
and I took the opportunity of whispering to Poirot:
Poirot nodded absently. He seemed absorbed in thought; so much so that
“Can you give us no help in solving it, monsieur?” interposed Poirot,
“A great pity,” agreed Poirot gravely.
There was silence. Poirot remained lost in thought for a few minutes.
Poirot nodded thoughtfully.
“As I was about to proceed, Monsieur Poirot, that document is now null
“_Hein!_” said Poirot. He reflected for a moment, and then asked: “Was
“Suppose,” suggested Poirot, “that, unknown to you, she had made a new
“Ah!” Poirot seemed to have exhausted his questions.
Poirot smiled.
John Cavendish had turned to Poirot.
“Will you come with us, Monsieur Poirot? We are going through my
“There _is_ a later will.” It was Poirot who spoke.
Poirot turned to John.
Poirot raised his hand.
We waited in a tense silence. Poirot alone seemed perfectly at his
approach of Manning. John looked questioningly at Poirot. The latter
Poirot stepped forward briskly. Manning’s eye swept over him with a
Poirot sharply.
“Thank you, Manning, that will do,” said Poirot pleasantly.
I much fear there is no coincidence there. Monsieur Poirot, I am sure
Monsieur Poirot for elucidating the matter. But for him, we should
Poirot smiled and answered:
Poirot looked inquiringly at me.
Poirot. He’s helping us, you know, Evie.”
Miss Howard shook hands with Poirot, but glanced suspiciously over her
Dorcas brought in fresh tea. As she left the room, Poirot came over
“We are at one then,” said Poirot, “for I, too, want to hang the
“Believe me, Miss Howard,” said Poirot very earnestly, “if Mr.
Poirot nodded sympathetically.
“You’ve got the keys still, haven’t you, Poirot?” I asked, as we
Taking the keys from Poirot, John unlocked it, and we all passed in.
Poirot drew out the small bunch of keys.
“_Milles tonnerres!_” cried Poirot, dumbfounded. “And I—who have both
Poirot laid down the case again.
Poirot answered them categorically—almost mechanically.
We stared at one another blankly. Poirot had walked over to the
“Ah!” cried Poirot, with a gesture of anger. “That, I do not know! A
not know how much Poirot would wish me to disclose. As I saw a faint
could hear Poirot shouting and expounding. I was vexed to think that my
stepped briskly down the stairs. The sight of me calmed Poirot almost
Poirot stood aside to let her pass.
Poirot produced the empty box which had contained powders.
I shrugged my shoulders. I privately thought that Poirot was rather too
Poirot did not appear to be listening to me.
Poirot smiled.
Poirot looked at me curiously.
“On the contrary,” said Poirot quietly, “there are several points in
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
“We do not agree, eh?” said Poirot. “Well, let us leave it. Time will
Poirot shook his head.
“Poirot, is that seriously your opinion?”
A groan burst from Poirot.
We had reached Leastways Cottage, and Poirot ushered me upstairs to his
Poirot had placed our two chairs in front of the open window which
“Look, Poirot!” I said.
“A little minute,” cried Poirot from the window. “I come.”
“Oh, Mr. Poirot, I’m sorry for the inconvenience, but I heard that
Poirot’s face remained quite impassive.
agitation was too much for him. He clutched Poirot by the arm, and sank
his voice to a whisper: “Just tell me this, Mr. Poirot, it isn’t—it
I hardly heard what Poirot replied. Something evidently of a
Poirot’s eyes met mine.
We went slowly upstairs again. I was opening my lips, when Poirot
Hercule Poirot! There are two facts of significance.”
“But it was a glorious day!” I interrupted. “Poirot, you’re pulling my
“Poirot, I cannot believe you are serious.”
I endeavoured to interrupt, but Poirot swept on.
In the interval before the inquest, Poirot was unfailing in his
On one point, Poirot seemed to have a curious obsession. He once or
Poirot and I sat together, not being required to give evidence.
I heard Poirot chuckle softly beside me.
Dorcas’s evidence on this point was substantially what Poirot and I had
This was news to me and glancing sideways at Poirot, I fancied that it
the evening of the 17th. Poirot and I had, of course already seen it.
Poirot was fidgeting nervously.
to the next point, and Poirot drew a deep breath of relief.
staggered. I looked at Poirot. There was an expression of exultation on
“Ah!” murmured Poirot to himself. “But it is an idea, that!”
At that point, Poirot nudged me gently, indicating two men who were
I questioned Poirot mutely. He put his lips to my ear.
As we came out of the Stylites Arms, Poirot drew me aside by a gentle
In a few moments, they emerged, and Poirot at once stepped forward, and
“Why, if it isn’t Mr. Poirot!” cried the Inspector. He turned to the
other man. “You’ve heard me speak of Mr. Poirot? It was in 1904 he and
Antwerp—thanks to Mr. Poirot here.”
Poirot.
But Poirot answered gravely:
But Japp was looking attentively at Poirot.
Poirot smiled.
scrutiny of Poirot.
Poirot’s had the start of us. We shouldn’t have been here as soon as
now,” suggested Poirot.
Poirot looked at him thoughtfully.
Japp was regarding Poirot with comical perplexity.
“Can’t you go a little further, Mr. Poirot? A wink’s as good as a
Poirot nodded gravely.
conclude that Poirot was mad.
“I daren’t do it, Mr. Poirot. _I_’d take your word, but there’s others
Poirot reflected a moment.
“Well, my friend,” cried Poirot, before I could get in a word, “what do
“Why, in a thousand ingenious ways,” cried Poirot. “See; say that it is
“My dear Poirot, I am sure you are capable of thinking of seventy! But,
“Yes, yes, too conclusive,” continued Poirot, almost to himself. “Real
I was silent. And in a minute or two, Poirot continued:
Poirot!”
But Poirot cut me short ruthlessly.
“It may be so,” I said, fascinated by Poirot’s eloquence. “But, if that
“Ah, why indeed?” said Poirot, calming down. “If he were arrested, he
“What can it be?” I mused, won over to Poirot’s views for the moment,
“Can you not guess?” asked Poirot, smiling.
Poirot spread out his hands apologetically.
Poirot, who was watching me intently, gave a sigh.
Poirot nodded.
“Then there is Mrs. Cavendish,” continued Poirot. “That’s another who
Poirot nodded reflectively.
“Yes, a good deal that was peculiar came out to-day,” continued Poirot.
“Which is a very good, or a very bad explanation,” remarked Poirot. “It
“_Mon ami_,” replied Poirot gravely, “when you find that people are not
“Oh, come now, Poirot! I won’t cite Lawrence, or Mrs. Cavendish. But
sincerity. Still, I had a great respect for Poirot’s sagacity—except on
Poirot gave me a curious look, which I could not quite fathom. He
Poirot seized his hat, gave a ferocious twist to his moustache, and,
Poirot had conferred with Japp in a low tone on the way up, and it was
drawing-room. I realized the significance of this. It was up to Poirot
Personally, I was not sanguine. Poirot might have excellent reasons for
Summerhaye would require tangible proofs, and these I doubted if Poirot
which Japp closed. Poirot politely set chairs for everyone. The
Poirot opened the proceedings.
“_Mesdames_ and _messieurs_,” said Poirot, bowing as though he were a
start as Poirot pronounced his name.
“Mr. Inglethorp,” said Poirot, addressing him directly, “a very dark
“I do not think, monsieur,” said Poirot pointedly, “that you quite
Summerhaye’s lips. Poirot went on.
“I mean,” said Poirot deliberately, “that you are suspected of
“I do not think”—Poirot watched him narrowly—“that you quite realize
his hands. Poirot approached and stood over him.
Poirot nodded thoughtfully, like a man whose mind is made up.
Poirot turned to face us. “_Mesdames_ and _messieurs_! I speak! Listen!
I, Hercule Poirot, affirm that the man who entered the chemist’s shop,
“My word,” he cried, “you’re the goods! And no mistake, Mr. Poirot!
“I will tell you why,” interrupted Poirot. “There was a certain
Poirot here, arrested you would have been, as sure as eggs is eggs!”
the servants. Don’t you bother about anything. Mr. Poirot, here, will
As they all went out of the room, Poirot turned and made me a sign to
It must have been quite twenty minutes before Poirot rejoined me.
clumsy. I made but a slight gesture”—I know Poirot’s gestures—“with the
believe you’re right about that man, Poirot. I don’t like him.”
“He is clever,” observed Poirot meditatively.
“What?” Poirot caught me violently by the shoulders. “Was Dr.
“My dear Poirot,” I expostulated, “I never thought it would interest
John was in the smoking-room. Poirot went straight to him.
“Now, Poirot,” I remarked resignedly, “perhaps you will tell me what
“In clearing Alfred Inglethorp,” continued Poirot, “I have been obliged
“Come now,” urged Poirot encouragingly. “Do not fear. Speak your mind.
“Yes, my friend,” said Poirot unexpectedly, “we can. One of my first
Poirot shook his head energetically.
“Tcha! Tcha!” cried Poirot irritably. “You argue like a child. If Miss
Poirot shook his head.
Poirot smiled.
But Poirot’s shake of the head was so energetic that I stopped.
Poirot looked puzzled.
to say this to him. ‘I have a message for you, from Poirot. He says:
We were running into Tadminster now, and Poirot directed the car to the
Poirot hopped down briskly, and went inside. In a few minutes he was
“I know Dr. Bauerstein had it tested,” replied Poirot quietly.
This proceeding of Poirot’s, in respect of the cocoa, puzzled me
Poirot; but I met him half-way, coming up to the house, and at once
Poirot bundled everything out on the floor with scant ceremony. There
were one or two green fabrics of varying shades; but Poirot shook his
“_Ohó!_” said Poirot. “_Ohó!_” He turned it over in his hands,
Poirot wished her good morning with Gallic politeness, and went on:
“These evenings must have been great fun,” said Poirot genially. “I
“So Dorcas knows nothing about that black beard,” said Poirot
Poirot nodded.
“Someone with a good deal of intelligence,” remarked Poirot dryly. “You
thought that Poirot appreciated me at my true worth.
This was naturally gratifying, but Poirot’s next words were not so
I was hurt, and showed it. Poirot hurried to explain himself.
“Here comes Miss Howard,” said Poirot suddenly. “She is the very
With a nod that was barely civil, Miss Howard assented to Poirot’s
We went into the little morning-room, and Poirot closed the door.
“Well, Monsieur Poirot,” said Miss Howard impatiently, “what is it? Out
“Ah!” Poirot studied her seriously. “Miss Howard, I will ask you one
“That is arsenic—not strychnine,” said Poirot mildly.
“Exactly. _If_ you are convinced he did it,” said Poirot quietly. “I
“Exactly,” said Poirot. “That bears out my little idea entirely.”
“No,” said Poirot curtly. “Because your instinct is not against Mr.
“I am right, am I not?” asked Poirot.
Poirot shook his head gravely.
Poirot nodded, as if satisfied.
“If we are wrong, well and good,” said Poirot. “No one will be more
“Miss Howard,” said Poirot gravely, “this is unworthy of you.”
“There,” said Poirot, looking after her, “goes a very valuable ally.
“Instinct is a marvellous thing,” mused Poirot. “It can neither be
Poirot studied me attentively for a moment or two. Then, to my intense
Poirot looked at me very earnestly, and again shook his head.
“The two often go together,” said Poirot enigmatically.
and surprise Poirot with the ultimate result.
I had had no opportunity as yet of passing on Poirot’s message to
Otherwise, Poirot himself might relieve me of it. It was true that I
“Yes. The truth is, I’ve got a message for you—from Poirot.”
“Well, what am I to tell Poirot?”
Poirot had been asked by John to remain to lunch, and was already
had been handed round, and Dorcas had left the room, Poirot suddenly
little idea”—Poirot’s “little ideas” were becoming a perfect
“I mean,” explained Poirot, “you are sure it was bolted, and not merely
“Ah, that settles it.” And Poirot looked crestfallen.
After lunch Poirot begged me to accompany him home. I consented rather
I had expected Poirot to be disappointed; but, to my surprise, he
Poirot switched off on another tack.
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
kindly and charitable. I even forgave Poirot for his absurd secrecy. In
light increased. Poirot’s mysterious doings, his hints—they all fitted
“That I don’t see,” I confessed, “but I’ll tell you this: Poirot thinks
“Poirot? Does he? How do you know?”
I told him of Poirot’s intense excitement on hearing that Dr.
told him of the cocoa sample which Poirot had taken to be analysed.
sample—except Poirot,” I added, with belated recognition.
Then I remembered that enigmatical conversation between Poirot and
and told her of Poirot’s wish to visit the dispensary.
have as to his being suspected. I remembered how Poirot had relied on
I waited to hear no more, but tore up the village to find Poirot.
To my extreme annoyance, Poirot was not in, and the old Belgian who
I was dumbfounded. What on earth could Poirot be doing in London! Was
I retraced my steps to Styles in some annoyance. With Poirot away, I
only Poirot had been accessible, I could have asked his advice. What
Poirot put it into my head. Yes, decidedly, the little man was clever.
After breakfast, I decided to go down to the village, and see if Poirot
“Poirot,” I exclaimed, with relief, and seizing him by both hands, I
“My friend,” replied Poirot, “I do not know what you are talking
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
“Nothing at all, of course,” replied Poirot, smiling. “But we were
“What?” cried Poirot, in apparently lively astonishment. “Dr.
Poirot placidly.
Poirot gave me one look, which conveyed a wondering pity, and his full
Poirot nodded.
“He is, of course, a German by birth,” said Poirot thoughtfully,
But I could not look at it in Poirot’s philosophical way.
“Yes. I should fancy he had found her very useful,” remarked Poirot.
handed to Poirot, murmuring as she did so the cryptic words:
Poirot unfolded the sheet of paper eagerly, and uttered an exclamation
Poirot’s attention. At the top, it bore the printed stamp of Messrs.
“Good,” replied Poirot, folding up the paper again. “I, also, am of
“She meant,” replied Poirot promptly, “that she found it on top of a
“Poirot,” I asked earnestly, “have you made up your mind about this
With a long drawn exclamation of ecstasy, Poirot led the way back to
Poirot did not make his appearance the following morning, and there was
Just before tea, I strolled down to tell Poirot of the new
But, on the following day, no sign of Poirot. I was getting angry. He
I had almost forgotten that enigmatical message of Poirot’s, but now my
high horse, and once more seek out Poirot at Leastways Cottage.
This time I was received with a smile. Monsieur Poirot was within.
Poirot was sitting by the table, his head buried in his hands. He
But, to my great surprise, Poirot nodded gravely.
“You are not serious, Poirot?”
“The moment has come,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “and I do not know
but I, Hercule Poirot, would attempt it!” And he tapped himself proudly
forebore to contradict Poirot, and gently took him to task for
Poirot nodded, and gently taking the photographs from me locked them up
Poirot shook his head.
Poirot’s smile became rather enigmatical.
Our eyes met. Poirot’s were pleasantly vague. He got up and hummed a
“Poirot,” I said, “what was in this particular little bottle?”
Poirot looked out of the window.
“I dropped my hat from the balcony,” explained Poirot simply. “Visitors
“Poirot,” I said, “your gaiety does not deceive me. This is a very
“I do not know,” said Poirot. “But one thing does strike me. No doubt
I jumped up. Poirot followed me down the narrow stairs. Mary Cavendish
as Lawrence told me you were with Monsieur Poirot I thought I would
“Alas, madame,” said Poirot, “I thought you had come to honour me with
started ever so slightly—“remember, Papa Poirot is always at your
“Come, will you not walk back with us too, Monsieur Poirot?”
that in some way she was nervous of Poirot’s eyes.
as I turned to catch her I met the quiet triumph in Poirot’s eyes.
I expressed my admiration to Poirot, and he nodded thoughtfully.
Poirot grinned.
“Every murderer is probably somebody’s old friend,” observed Poirot
on to John what I believed to be Poirot’s views concerning Bauerstein.
I asked Poirot whether he thought John would be condemned. To my
“But, Poirot——” I protested.
evidence. That is the whole trouble. I, Hercule Poirot, know, but I
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
“It is quite _en règle_,” continued Poirot. “Strangely enough, I can
Poirot was a true prophet. I will not go into the details of the police
Poirot being included in the family party.
As the weeks went by, the state of Poirot’s nerves grew worse and
paper?” He held up the same dusty piece which Poirot and I had examined
But I myself was puzzled, and as soon as I was alone with Poirot I
“Ah!” said Poirot appreciatively. “He is a clever man, that Sir
Poirot, I noticed, was looking profoundly discouraged. He had that
“What is it, Poirot?” I inquired.
With a great thump on the table, Poirot demolished his carefully built
“On an occasion when I was enraged, without doubt,” observed Poirot,
But I stopped suddenly. For Poirot, uttering a hoarse and inarticulate
“Good heavens, Poirot!” I cried. “What is the matter? Are you taken
“Ah, _ma foi_, no!” replied Poirot frankly. “This time it is an idea
“What _is_ the matter with Monsieur Poirot? He rushed past me crying
But night fell, and Poirot had not returned.
Poirot’s abrupt departure had intrigued us all greatly. Sunday morning
Poirot alighting from a car, accompanied by Japp and Summerhaye. The
“You know, Monsieur Poirot, that you have _carte blanche_ in every
Still beaming, Poirot marshalled us all into the drawing-room, bringing
“No, no!” Poirot went up to her and pleaded in a low voice.
The company once assembled, Poirot rose from his seat with the air of a
She shook her head, and Poirot shook his also.
being incongruous! Poirot was continuing:
Poirot paused. Mary looked up at him, the colour slowly rising in her
“All you have said is quite true, Monsieur Poirot. It was the most
Poirot, eh? But you would not trust me.”
it is extraordinary no one has thought of it?” Poirot looked round the
In the deathly silence, Poirot pieced together the slips of paper and,
A chair was overturned. Poirot skipped nimbly aside. A quick movement
“_Messieurs, mesdames_,” said Poirot, with a flourish, “let me
“Poirot, you old villain,” I said, “I’ve half a mind to strangle you!
Inglethorp and Miss Howard were in custody. Now at last, I had Poirot
Poirot did not answer me for a moment, but at last he said:
“My friend,” besought Poirot, “I implore you, do not enrage yourself!
“Then again,” continued Poirot, “at the beginning, did I not repeat to
Poirot stared at me in surprise.
Poirot puffed at his tiny cigarette, his eyes fixed on the ceiling.
“No one would think of looking there,” Poirot continued. “And he will
Poirot nodded.
“And very good reasons too,” replied Poirot. “For a long time they were
“You are joking, Poirot!”
“Exactly,” said Poirot dryly. “And that was just what confirmed my
“There, Poirot, you are quite wrong! I happen to know for a fact that,
“Then she certainly did mind very much,” remarked Poirot. “They are
“Dear me, Poirot,” I said with a sigh, “I think you have explained
I looked at Poirot in silent amazement. The colossal cheek of the
little man! Who on earth but Poirot would have thought of a trial for
“I perceive your thoughts, _mon ami_,” said Poirot, smiling at me. “No
one but Hercule Poirot would have attempted such a thing! And you are
the sound of the bell below. She had started up. Poirot had opened the
“Perhaps you are right, Poirot,” I said gently. “Yes, it is the
exclaiming: “You dears!” kissed first me and then Poirot, and rushed
her as much as she thought,” replied Poirot philosophically.
“Eh! Monsieur Lawrence,” called Poirot. “We must congratulate you, is
“And neither of them is for you?” finished Poirot. “Never mind. Console